---
featured: false
---
Target Achievement(s): Rural Development
Water Supply
Power  constant supply in the country
Uplift of the standard of education in the nation
Improvement of health care
Roads network in the nation

Legistlative Interest(s): Education, Water Resources, Petroleum Resources, MDG, Electricity/Power, Agriculture, State & L.G, House Services, Transportation, Foreign Affairs, Health & Sports

Awards & Honours: August 2010 - Africa Merit Award for Integrity. By lead Time Africa Magazine.
July 2010 - Conferment of Honorary Special Marshal. By The Special Marshal & Partnership Department, Federal Road safety Corps, RS10.1 Sokoto.
August 2008 - Pan African Legacy of Patriotism Award for Excellency in Patriotism & Conflict Resolution. By PAN-MEDIA AFRICA Publishers of African News Magazine.

* Councillor at Gwadabawa L.G
* Student at L. E. A. Primary School Certificate, Salame, Gwadabawa Local Gov't.
* Federal Representative at House of Representatives from May 2011 to May 2019
* Committee Member at Education (Basic & Secondary) Committee (Senate) until May 2015
* Committee Member at Finance Committee (Reps) until May 2015
* Committee Member at Emergency & Disaster Preparedness Committee (Reps) until May 2015
* Committee Member at Public Service Matter Committee (Reps) until May 2015
* Speaker at Sokoto State House of Assembly until 2010
* Ag. Governor at Sokoto State, Nigeria from April 2008 to May 2008
* Student at The Polytechnic of Sokoto State. from 2004 to 2005
* Student at Shehu Shagari College of Education, Sokoto. from 2002 to 2003
* Student at Usman Danfodiyo University, Sokoto from 1997 to 2002
* Student at Usman Danfodiyo University, Sokoto from 1990 to 1991
* Student at National service, National Youth Service corps. (NYSC) Akwa Ibom. from 1987 to 1990
* Student at Usman Danfodiyo University, Sokoto from 1982 to 1985
* Student at Shehu Shagari College of Education, Sokoto. from 1977 to 1981
* Student at College of Arts and Islamic Studies, Sokoto. from 1974 to 1977
* Student at Giginya Memorial College, Sokoto. from 1969 to 1975

