---
published: true
slug: when-the-wind-blows-covid-19-and-a-failed-healthcare-system
author: EiENigeria
title: 'When The Wind Blows: Covid-19 And A Failed Healthcare System'
---
Nigeria’s public health system is ordinarily debilitated by poor coordination, a lack of accountability, few incentives to improve performance, and a lack of resources at the frontline (Watts, 2018).

The Nigerian elites have always preferred travelling abroad for medical treatment and prided themselves on how effective health systems abroad are compared to the one we have here. Little wonder the Minister for Health estimated that the country spends over $1 billion annually on medical tourism. But with borders shut around the world, the elites must now confront using their country’s own dilapidated healthcare facilities in battling COVID-19.

When the COVID-19 pandemic broke out, there were serious concerns that Nigeria's fragmented government, failed healthcare and corrupt political system would prove ill-equipped in dealing with the acute public health crisis hurtling towards the country but alas, these concerns have proven to be valid. Earlier on in the outbreak, at a time when better preparations could have been made to forestall the worst impacts of a broad outbreak, the Nigerian government took a snail-like response and plunged the nation into a web of confusion. It's like the case of a student whose lecturer gave focus areas ahead of an exam and still failed despite the heads up.

State governments across the country found themselves in competition with one another over medical supplies. They were left to fend for themselves, and the federal government did little in taking control of the supply chain to efficiently distribute resources. It is unfortunate that it would take the coming of a pandemic of the nature of the coronavirus for our officials to realise how poor health care delivery is in the country. When the disease first came to the country, it met our health care system barely prepared. At the airports, the quarantine operations were not up to scratch. The tracking system necessary to track and isolate persons suspected to have had contact with those that tested positive was dodgy. There was a shortage of items like face masks and ventilators in the make-shift isolation centres. To make matters worse, the synergy and coordination necessary to provide a robust response to the pandemic were not seamless enough, leading to disjointed efforts by parties responsible.

Years of neglect through underfunding and a lack of appropriate policies and procedures have resulted in a dysfunctional national health system. It is little wonder the health sector is recorded as having the highest number of professionals leaving the country for greener pastures where their services are needed and appreciated more. Nigeria's loss evidently is the gain of other countries where those same professionals are ironically entrusted to run the health system which Nigerian elites run to for their health checks.

If governments in Nigeria over the years had established a proper health care system complete with funding, provision of facilities and equipment as well as a laid down operational framework for managing and sustaining the services, we would not have been caught napping when epidemics and national health emergencies arise.

During the Ebola outbreak, Transparency International reported how the response to the outbreak in West African countries was undermined by the corruption in their health sectors. Unfortunately, the lessons were not learnt. Understanding the shortfalls in the federal and state responses to the crisis will be essential in mitigating the effects of a reoccurrence.

The COVID-19 pandemic is a wake-up call to policymakers as the unusual and unprecedented nature of the crisis has made it impossible for citizens to rely on foreign health care services and more difficult to solicit for international support given the competing demand for medical supplies and equipment. A more integrated response spanning several sectors, including the health, finance, and trade sectors, is required to address structural issues that make the country less resilient to shocks and limit its range of policy responses. In the long term, tougher decisions need to be made, including but not limited to diversifying the country’s revenue base away from oil exports and improving investments in the health care sector in ensuring that the economy is able to recover quickly from difficult conditions in the future.
