---
published: true
slug: all-about-first-ladyship
author: EiENigeria
title: All About First Ladyship
---
Modern democracies often have the president's consort addressed as the First Lady.  As soon as the president is inaugurated, his wife begins to run the Office of the First Lady. The functions performed by the first lady vary from one country to the other but our focus will be on Nigeria.

In Nigeria, first ladies perform invaluable and indispensable social functions of state even when their office is not constitutionally provided for. They function informally but with quasi-official roles receiving and entertaining foreign dignitaries and their families on behalf of the state.

In spite of the marginal status of the office in the body polity of the nation, first ladies have contributed significantly to the human development index of the nation and provided a strategic platform for women mobilization and consciousness in public affairs.

They are unofficial political influencers, strategic mobilizers and leaders of women. They also function as coordinators of intergovernmental agencies and policies for the course of women, and for the success of their husbands’ administration. The elastic influence of first ladies is on steady build-up, such that the seeming interest of the office holder is respected and treated as sacrosanct by many a public office holder and the citizenry. They participate actively in their husbands’ electioneering campaigns and the project of wooing the electorate to their party of affiliation. They find their way through state connections to attract public funds to finance their projects. In the frame of NGO based projects, they bring individuals and organizations doing business in the nation to make donations. The donations run into very huge sums of money at the discretionary disposal of the particular first lady. 

However, the activities of first ladies face some criticisms such as excesses in the use of state connections, abuse of power, meddlesomeness in their husband’s administration, lack of checks and control mechanism in their operations. These make them powerful and dictatorial. They now use their platform for campaign, and the services they render as tools to herald the “good intention” of their husbands’ administration. Political office seekers use the channel of their programmes to lobby for support and endorsement. Truly, those who obtain a first lady's favour find leeway to acceptance by the husband and political party respectively. This is also the case in non-elective appointments. Political appointees who have issues with the first lady do not last in such positions under her husband’s administration. Cases have been reported wherein some first ladies carry out their activities with impunity. An example was when Aisha Buhari accompanied by her children and a team of policemen, forcefully confronted Tunde Yusuf, the President’s influential Personal Assistant and favourite nephew, following an earlier heated disagreement over his refusal to self-isolate after his trip to Lagos to see his wife, who had just given birth. There was an altercation between him and Mrs. Buhari, her children and her security aides that eventually snowballed into a near-fatal brawl. Tunde, who appeared helpless and clearly outnumbered, had to flee on foot. This was when Mrs. Buhari’s ADC and four members of her police escort fired some shots into the air as they pursued him. He had been seriously wounded at this time but successfully made it to the residence of Mamman Daura where he was sheltered for the night. The Inspector-General of Police later ordered the detention of the ADC and reassigned him.

The perception and role of the first lady have long been a subject of debate. Media presentations of First Ladies tend to collapse their cross-cutting identities into simplified gendered constructs, often giving priority to their fashion choices, or portray them only as stoically supportive wives and/or loving mothers to family and nation.

While we acknowledge the increasing participation of first ladies in political affairs, we charge them to possess that amazon character and ensure that their programs and projects show remarkable achievements in the overall human and capital development of the nation. Above all, they should ensure that the phenomenon of the first lady is a veritable instrument for improving women’s consciousness and participation in politics and public affairs.

While the role of many first ladies across the country is not constitutionally mandated, their unique role centres largely on identifying and spearheading certain social causes.

