---
published: true
slug: edodecides2020-godfatherism-officeofthecitizen
author: EiENigeria
title: '#edodecides2020: Godfatherism & #officeofthecitizen'
---
Who saw this coming?!

The Edo 2020 election may have come and gone but it set the tone for subsequent elections. People had varied narratives on what they perceived would happen pre-election. From speculating that there would be war and bloodshed to predicting that the interference of godfathers would deprive the people of Edo state of electing their preferred candidate, the people of Edo state have shown that power belongs to the people indeed.

According to Reuben Abati, there were factors that contributed to Godwin Obaseki's victory and we believe you can take a cue or two from them.

Firstly, the intervention of the United States and the United Kingdom on the eve of the election so to say made a huge difference. The US issued a statement to say that it will impose and had already imposed restrictions on the visas of Nigerian politicians who committed electoral offences in the November 2019 elections in Kogi and Bayelsa states and who have behaved in similar fashion in the forthcoming Edo and Ondo Gubernatorial elections, on September 19 and October 10 respectively. The UK Mission in Nigeria followed suit by announcing similar measures with the addition that assets of Nigerian electoral offenders in the UK will be seized, and such persons will be prosecuted under international law. Thank you, US and UK. I am of the firm belief that the political actors who would otherwise have misbehaved in the Edo Gubernatorial election had to restrain themselves because of your intervention. They don't want to be restricted. They don't want to lose their visas. They need access to US and UK hospitals whenever they fall ill. They don't want to be named and shamed.

Secondly, the intervention of Comrade Adams Oshiomhole, Asiwaju Bola Tinubu and Captain Hosa Okunbor, and the desperate anti-Obaseki campaign launched by the APC ended up working in Obaseki's favour. Equity may not favour the indolent but it often favours the underdog. The all-powerful APC machinery was so targeted at Obaseki that unwittingly, the APC scored an own goal against itself. Days before the election, the people of Edo state began to ask questions. Adams Oshiomhole as Governor in the same state had campaigned against the influence of godfathers. He practically drove Chief Anthony Anenih of blessed memory out of town. In 2020, Oshiomhole found himself in fits of self-contradiction as he repudiated everything that he ever stood for. He spoke from every corner of the mouth. He apologized to the people and the chiefs of Edo that he made a mistake in 2016. Did they believe him? I don't think so. The same man could show up in 2024 and tell fresh stories. Obaseki's victory is an outright rejection of Oshiomhole's brand of politics. The people of Edo also rejected Asiwaju Tinubu's busy-body intervention. This in fact inspired Edo nationalism. The people proclaimed: "Edo no be Lagos". "Obaseki no be Ambode". To this extent, the Edo Gubernatorial election was a protest against godfatherism and an affirmation of Edo nationalism. The Edo people rejected the idea that anyone at all could dictate to them. They stood by whatever mistake anyone thought they made in 2016.

Thirdly, Obaseki was helped further by the PDP machinery. The PDP cashed in on the failure of the APC in Edo state and took maximum advantage of it. The party which claims that Edo is a PDP state simply grabbed a rejected Governor of the APC and offered him everything that he wanted: a golden offer that accommodated his Deputy. It was a deft political move. The PDP used Obaseki's defection from the APC to strengthen its base in Edo State. It countered every negative move by the APC by deploying its own aggressive campaigners, led by Governor Nyesom Wike of Rivers state. Others on the ground included the PDP members from Edo state who are members of the National Assembly and the State House of Assembly. Together, they deployed high-grade propaganda to shape public perception.

Lastly, Obaseki's victory can also be linked to the politics of 2023. Unknown to many, some key figures in the APC worked for him. Edo became a battleground for the presidential politics of 2023. Those who do not want Oshiomhole and Bola Tinubu to determine the fortunes of the APC and Nigeria in 2023 moved in and checkmated the process.

If there is one thing to take away from this, it is that anything can happen in the Nigerian political sphere. Citizens should kill that mentality that they are powerless. The power elect and remove lies in your hands. Take charge!
